.TH nullmailer-queue 8
.SH NAME
nullmailer-queue \- insert mail messages into the queue
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nullmailer-queue
.SH DESCRIPTION
This program reads a formatted mail message from standard input and
safely injects it into the outgoing mail queue.
.PP
The data sent into standard input is expected to have the following
format: one line containing the envelope sender, one or more lines
containing the recipients, a single blank line, and then the contents
of the message exactly as it is to be transmitted to the destination.
All lines are terminated with a single line-feed character.
All addresses must contain a fully-qualified domain name.
.PP
.SH RETURN VALUE
Exits 0 if it successfully queues the message.
If it failed to queue the message, it exits 1 and prints an error
message to stdandard output.
.SH CONTROL FILES
.TP
.B adminaddr
If this file is not empty, all recipients to users at either
"localhost" (the literal string) or the canonical host name (from the
.I me
control file) are remapped to this address.
This is provided to allow local daemons to be able to send email to
"somebody@localhost" and have it go somewhere sensible instead of
being bounced by your relay host. To send to multiple addresses, put
them all on one line separated by a comma.
.TP
.B allmailfrom
If this file is not empty, its contents will override the envelope
sender on all messages.
.SH OTHER FILES
.TP
.B /var/spool/nullmailer/queue
The directory into which the completed messages are moved.
.TP
.B /var/spool/nullmailer/tmp
The directory in which messages are formed temporarily.
.TP
.B /var/spool/nullmailer/trigger
A pipe used to trigger
.BR nullmailer-send
to immediately start sending the message from the queue.
.PP
Note that due to
.B nullmailer-queue
using hard links to manage emails both
.I /var/spool/nullmailer/queue
and
.I /var/spool/nullmailer/tmp
MUST reside on the same filesystem.
.SH SEE ALSO
nullmailer-inject(1),
nullmailer-send(8)
.SH LIMITATIONS
This program should enforce system-wide configurable message length
limits.
