.TH nullmailer-dsn 1
.SH NAME
nullmailer-dsn \- Reformat a queued message into a delivery status notification (DSN)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nullmailer-dsn
[
.B options
]
.I status-code
<
.I message
.SH DESCRIPTION
This program reads a nullmailer queue message from standard input,
transforms it into a delivery status notification, and writes the result
to standard output. The output is formatted to be fed into
.BR nullmailer-queue .
.P
All times in the options are expressed as seconds since midnight GMT January 1, 1970 (the UNIX epoch).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-diagnostic\-code= STRING
Sets the actual diagnostic code issued by the mail transport. Must be in the form of
"\fItype\fR; \fItext\fR", where
.I type
would typically be the protocol name, such as
.BR SMTP .
This adds a
.B Diagnostic-Code
header for each recipient.
.TP
.BI \-\-envelope\-id= STRING
Original envelope ID. Setting this adds a
.B Original-Envelope-Id
header to the delivery status section.
.TP
.BI \-\-last\-attempt= TIME
Sets the time of the last attempted delivery. Defaults to the access time of the input message.
This sets the date in the
.B Last-Attempt-Date
header for each recipient.
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-lines= COUNT
Sets the maximum number of lines of the original message to copy into the generated message.
A value of zero copies only the original header.
Negative values copy the whole message.
Defaults to
.I bouncelines
below, or zero if that is empty.
.TP
.BI \-\-orig\-timestamp= TIME
Sets the time of the original message. Defaults to the change time of
the input message. This sets the date in the
.B Arrival-Date
header in the delivery status section.
.TP
.BI \-\-remote= STRING
Sets the name of the remote MTA server.
This adds a
.B Remote-MTA
header for each recipient.
.TP
.BI \-\-retry\-until= TIME
Sets the time of the (future) final delivery attempt. No default. This adds a
.B Will-Retry-Until
header for each recipient.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Exits 0 if it was successful, otherwise it prints a diagnostic message
to standard error and exits 1.
.SH CONTROL FILES
.TP
.B adminaddr
If
.B doublebounceto
is empty, double bounces are delivered to this address instead.
If no address is configured, double bounces are not generated.
.TP
.B bouncelines
Sets the maximum number of lines of the original message to copy.
May be overridden by
.B \-\-max\-lines
as above.
.TP
.B bounceto
The address to which all bounces should be sent.
If it is empty, the original sender address is used.
.TP
.B defaultdomain
The content of this file is appended to any host name that does not
contain a period (except
.BR localhost ),
including
.I defaulthost
and
.IR idhost .
Defaults to the value of the
.B me
control file, if it exists, otherwise the literal name
.BR defaultdomain .
.TP
.B defaulthost
The content of this file is appended to any address that is missing a
host name.
Defaults to the value of the
.I me
control file, if it exists, otherwise the literal name
.BR defaulthost .
.TP
.B doublebounceto
If the original sender was empty (the original message was a delivery
status or disposition notification), the double bounce is sent to the
address in this file.
.TP
.B idhost
The content of this file is used when building the message-id string
for the message.
Defaults to the canonicalized value of
.IR defaulthost .
.TP
.B me
The fully-qualified host name of the computer running nullmailer.
Defaults to the literal name
.BR me .
.SH SEE ALSO
nullmailer-queue(8),
nullmailer-send(8)
