.TH nullmailer-send 8
.SH NAME
nullmailer-send \- Send queued messages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nullmailer-send
.SH DESCRIPTION
This program is responsible for coordinating the transmission of
messages that have been queued by
.BR nullmailer-queue .
It uses a variety of protocol modules to deliver the messages from the
queue to remote "smart" servers.
.P
When the program starts, the queue is scanned to build a list of
messages to send.
The queue is rescanned when either the trigger is pulled, or after
.B pausetime
seconds have elapsed after the last failed delivery.
When there are no messages in the queue, nullmailer does no rescanning
until the trigger is pulled.
Pulling the trigger consists of opening up the trigger named pipe and
writing a single byte to it, which causes this program to be awakened
(if it's not already processing the queue).
This procedure is done by
.B nullmailer-queue
to ensure that messages are delivered immediately.
You can start delivery by hand from the command line like this:

.EX
    echo 1 > trigger
.EE
.P
Delivery of messages consists of reading the list of remote servers and
then trying to deliver the messages to these servers as follows.
For each remote in the list, the named protocol handler is executed once
for each message remaining in the queue.
If the protocol handler succeeds, the message is removed from the queue
and processing continues with the next message.
If the protocol handler reports a permanent failure
or the message has been in the queue longer than
.IR queuelifetime ,
the message is moved into the
.B failed
queue and a bounce message is generated with
.BR nullmailer-dsn .
If any messages remain in the queue, processing of the remaining
messages continues with the next remote.
When all the remotes have been tried,
.B nullmailer-send
sleeps for a number of seconds specified by
.B pausetime
before retrying sending the contents of the queue.
.SH CONTROL FILES
All the control files are reread each time the queue is run.
.TP
.B helohost
Sets the environment variable
.B $HELOHOST
which is used by the SMTP protocol module to set the parameter given to
the
.I HELO
command.  Defaults to the value of the
.B me
configuration file.
.TP
.B maxpause
The maximum time to pause between successive queue runs, in seconds.
Defaults to 24 hours
.RB ( 86400 ).
.TP
.B pausetime
The minimum time to pause between successive queue runs
when there are messages in the queue, in seconds.
Defaults to 1 minute
.RB ( 60 ).
Each time this timeout is reached, the timeout is doubled to a maximum
of
.BR maxpause .
After new messages are injected, the timeout is reset.
If this is set to
.BR 0 ,
nullmailer-send will exit immediately after going through the queue once
(one-shot mode).
.TP
.B queuelifetime
The maximum time a message is allowed to live in the queue before being
considered permanently failed, in seconds. Defaults to 7 days
.RB ( 604800 ).
.TP
.B remotes
This file contains a list of remote servers to which to send each
message.
Each line of this file contains a remote host name or address followed
by an optional protocol string, separated by white space.
The protocol name defaults to
.BR smtp ,
and may be followed by additional options for that module.
See the "PROTOCOL OPTIONS" section for a list of the available options.
The options may optionally be prefixed by
.I --
but this is not required.
The line is parsed according to standard shell quoting rules.
For example, to connect to port 2525 on your SMTP smart host,
which also requires SMTP authentication, and initiate TLS with
STARTTLS, use:

.EX
    smarthost.dom smtp port=2525 starttls user=user pass='my pass phrase'
.EE

Blank lines and lines starting with a pound (\fI#\fR) are ignored.
.TP
.B sendtimeout
The time to wait for a remote module listed above to complete sending a
message before killing it and trying again, in seconds.
Defaults to 1 hour
.RB ( 3600 ).
If this is set to
.BR 0 ,
.B nullmailer-send
will wait forever for messages to complete sending.
.SH "PROTOCOL OPTIONS"
.TP
.B port=\fIPORT
Set an alternate port number to connect to on the remote host. For example, SMTP may use
.B port=587
for the alternate SMTP "submission" port.
.TP
.B user=\fIUSERNAME
Set the SMTP authentication user name.
.TP
.B pass=\fIPASSWORD
Set the SMTP authentication password.
.TP
.BI source= HOSTNAME
Set the source address for connections to the remote host.
.TP
.B auth-login
Force SMTP "AUTH LOGIN" mode instead of auto-detecting.
.TP
.B auth-external
Use SMTP "AUTH EXTERNAL" for TLS client certificate authentication.
.TP
.B tls
Connect using TLS.
This will automatically switch the default port to
.BR 465 .
.TP
.B ssl
Alias for the
.B tls
option for compatibility.
.TP
.B starttls
Use the
.B STARTTLS
command to initiate a TLS session.
.TP
.B x509certfile=\fIFILENAME
Set the filename for a TLS client certificate to send to the server.
.TP
.B x509keyfile=\fIFILENAME
Set the filename for the private key for a TLS client certificate.
Defaults to the same file name as
.BR x509certfile .
.TP
.B x509cafile=\fIFILENAME
Set the TLS certificate authority trust filename. Defaults to
.BR /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt .
.TP
.B x509crlfile=\fIFILENAME
Set the TLS certificate revocation list filename.
.TP
.B x509fmtder
Specify that TLS X.509 files above are in DER format instead of PEM.
.TP
.B insecure
Don't abort a TLS connection if the server certificate fails validation.
Use this only if you know the server uses an invalid certificate.
.TP
.B tls-anon-auth
Use TLS anonymous authentication - replacing certificate authentication.
This means no external certificates or passwords are needed to set up the connection.
With this option your connection is vulnerable to man-in-the-middle (active or redirection) attacks.
However, the data are integrity protected and encrypted from passive eavesdroppers.
This option must be used with the insecure option - to acknowledge that you know what you are doing.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /var/spool/nullmailer/failed
The failed message queue.
.TP
.B /var/spool/nullmailer/queue
The outgoing message queue.
.TP
.B /var/spool/nullmailer/trigger
A trigger file to cause immediate delivery.
.TP
.B /usr/local/etc/nullmailer
The configuration directory.
.TP
.B /usr/local/libexec/nullmailer
The protocol program directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
nullmailer-dsn(1),
nullmailer-inject(1),
nullmailer-queue(8),
mailq(1)
http://www.postfix.org/TLS_README.html on how to setup a certificate-less Postfix SMTP server
